Okay.
You ready? Yeah. Okay. Morning, Chief Luther. As
you know, this morning I'm going to ask you a few
questions about the community. Yes, sir. And just
answer any way you want to. Okay. The first
question will be, Chief Luther, when and where
were you born? In Frost, actually, September 4,
1916. Okay, what about... That's a small
community in, uh, Navarre County, near Corse
County. In Corse County. Mm-hmm. Okay, and did
your family live there long? Yes, uh-huh, for, um,
some, uh, 50, 50 years. 50 to 60 years. Mm-hmm.
Okay, and where did you receive your early
schooling? At Forster County High School.
Forster County High School, and like I said,
junior high? Junior high, elementary, junior
high, and then junior high. Junior high, okay.
What were your plans after graduation? Did you
have some kind of degree, or excuse me, I mean some
kind of career in mind after graduating? Not
necessarily. My ambition at that particular time
was becoming a professional baseball player,
which I had a bright chance of
playing in the Class B league with Tyler Texas.
Yes, I see. Is that pro? Pro, yes, sir. I mean, you
could go straight from high school to pro without
going to college. Yes, I see. Okay. Do you have
anything else in mind? Or is that just the
overwhelming ambition? Yes, that was my main
ambition. And my second ambition was to be a member
of the Department of Public Safety. Okay. Now
we'll get on to the College Station. When and what
brought you first to the College Station in Bryan
area? In 1942, I was employed by the DPS as a Texas
Highway Patrolman. First station was in Waco.
There until March of 1944, went into service, U.S.
Navy. Spent two years with this charge in March of
1946,
at which time I was reinstated as a Texas Highway
Patrolman and sent to Bryce. So you came out of the
Navy and went back into the DPS and you were
assigned here at College Station. Yes, assigned
to Bryan Station, Bryan College Station
Community. Was that during World War II? That was
after World War II. So the two years you served was
during World War II? During World War II, yes. Do
you remember what year this was? 1944, 1945. Okay.
Now, what are your earliest memories of this area
as you came back? A community-like city. Bryan, at
that time, had a population of some 13,000, 13,500
people. And at that particular time, College
Station had a population of some 35,000 to 37,000.
Was it densely populated? No, sir. Was it flat
plains here? Yes. There we go. As a matter of fact,
Texas Avenue, that took the time to clean Brian and
College Station. It was an 18-foot slab with a
gravel trail. I see. I'm I'm just I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm
I'm
I'm I'm I'm I'm I didn't realize it was that
distance in between them. Okay.
Now, where was the major part of College Station
located when you came here? I'm not sure, you know,
where it was. I was wondering if it was located in
one particular section or was it surrounding? The
North Gate was the major part. Then everything was
located on North Dade? Generally, yes sir. I
thought there might have been an old section over
here on the South Dade side.
That was partially populated on the South side at
that time.
You're talking about the old Hardwick? It was a
place. Oh, there
was nightclubs over there? I see. And there was
just a very few houses and most of everything was
located over here at Northgate. Most of the
business was there. As a matter of fact, there was a
few business establishments over on Texas
Avenue. Jones Pharmacy is the one that I remember
rewetting. Was there anything back here on the
east side, you know, like across the tracks? Did
the school take up all the way to the tracks? To the
tracks. Was there anything on the other side?
They've got some buildings over there now.
Uh, the old cattle farm, right? Yes,
sir. And, uh, and dairy farm. Uh-huh. I see. Okay.
Um, uh, this is probably a little bit, maybe a
little tougher of a question. Uh, since then, how
has the area expanded? Which way has it, which way
has it gone? It's gone in all directions. Yes, sir.
Both, uh, the City of Bryan and Copper State. Yes,
sir. It didn't really matter,
just the whole
thing exploded? Yes, just exploded. In all
directions. Which way do you think it came to that?
That's a hard answer. It appears that Bryan,
perhaps, will have to go east, and perhaps College
Station. College Station will have to go east, or
south of east.
You
have
me know if College
Station and Bryan people have always got along
together good? Yes, very well as far as I know. work
together and projects. Yes, coordinated all of
that. Are there any, to your knowledge, are there
any parades that have been going on? Year after
year, it's kind of like an annual celebration?
Yes, the Christmas parade is an annual
celebration, and that's on November. And when
does that take place? Usually around the first of
December. First
of December.
And who participates? Both College Station and
Bryan, and some of the surrounding communities.
Can you remember anyone in particular that was
kind of and uh...
they have a
Okay. Let's
turn to farming. This area is a lot of farming,
concerned with the farming lot. Can you tell me,
has there been, to the best of your knowledge, any
changes in farming, the way they do farming, the
tools? Yes, it's become mechanized. Can you tell
me about that this year? Yes,
when
I first came to Brian, it was not uncommon to see
mules and horses used in cultivating the land in
the private river bottom, but now it's all
mechanized and tractors and mechanical
equipment, and that's definitely some of the
tractors they're using, atro-stock, or when
they're using the mules. What was that saying?
uh...
eight-year-old
rather than
too so
they uh... techniques other than increasing the
amount of area they can form at one time? Like crop
rotation, like
using big tractors. Remember the ones with the air
conditioning they've got now? Yes, uh-huh. Are
there any other techniques? None that I know of. I
think it's more or less a seasonal type. Those
two
crops have always
been major? Yes. Would you happen to know when
irrigation became
widely
used in this
area? I think perhaps
in about 1957 or long about that period. Is there
anything that made it mandatory then or it's just
what caused it to come in? I think the farmers at
that time, I don't know, in 50, maybe 55,
Okay,
now
I guess everybody, all the farmers in the area
generally went
to it automatically. Yes. Okay, please describe,
if you would, what forms of recreation everyone
july first-year
yes
anything that everybody
else here
You know, a lot of people like to go out to
Somerville. Well, of course,
yes, but there was an old facility
at Somerville in 1964, or by 1964. Is that a, I'm
sorry, I probably heard, is that a, A man-made
lake? A man-made.
When was it made?
Let me clarify that.
You mean by man-made, of course, it was the
construction of the dam up in the middle of the land
in the Yehaw Creek area.
So
it wouldn't be until 1964 that it would be used?
That's right. Okay. Was there anything else that
everyone liked to do? Was there a few bars or
something? Oh yes, there were quite a few bars and a
nightclub. Oh, a rink, I see.
Was it the same one that's located
over
there? No, this one was located on Highway 21, some
mile after mile after mile. Where did everybody
seem to go on Friday afternoons? For us, Friday
afternoon we may go to Somerville. On a particular
night we may go to Lakeview. Is there any
particular place that everybody seemed to really
enjoy and stood out
in everybody's mind? Oh, man, I can't think of any.
One place. Okay.
Where
did you like to go? Did you have one particular
place that you enjoyed? During the weekends, we
would go to the night owls. Friday,
Saturday, and Sunday, so I didn't have an
opportunity to visit or go to too many places. You
were off probably during the week. Yeah, one day a
week. I'd usually be on Wednesday. And then we
would start to get to college during the day off.
And I spent many hours working in the day.
Did you start playing
in the College Station area? College Station,
yeah. You would never get caught outside of the
area? Oh, yes. We had an area assigned to us. At that
time, we patrolled from Bryan to the Paris County
CBX and Highway 6 and Highway 2 Main. We had all the
Bunnison County. We had all the Robertson County
and all the Madison County.
Three
or fifty
weeks? Three. Wouldn't be the same way as that? No.
Now they have some twelve uniformed police
officers, DPS officers stationed in this area.
And three or four in Kyle, and three or four in
Hearn, and the same number in Madisonville, and
about the same number in Madisonville and
Hicksville. Were there any local police in those
areas that you had gone? Yes, very few. Very few.
When I first formed Brian, the senior college
station had one police force. And Brian had some
total of seven or eight, not more than ten. My
goodness. Was there enough crime to keep
them busy, or did they need more people but they
couldn't get them, or was it just a quiet time?
Well, they were always needing more people. I
mean, it's a real-ass community. It's not too
incriminating. Okay. Then, traffic
was a major
problem. How was the traffic in the first county?
Well, when I first came to Bride, in Bride's
County, the year of 1946, there were 14,000
people. Now, we have some 48,000 people. I'm sure
I'm
not real sure about
things
weren't all
the roads paved No.
We had the old farm
16... What is that?
1688. It was out of paid road. We had a farm that was
out of road. and north of
Bryan, and northwest
of Bryan, but that's not a paved road. And that's
the only thing that was paved in the way that that
took the time. Even the old San Antonio OS office, I
think that was, was not all paved. And about the
only paved roads that I can remember are Highway 6
and Highway 9. Uh, I was just thinking about
lights. When did they put
up the traffic lights? They haven't always been
there. They were always up there. No, it is. The
lights between, uh, uh, Bryan and, uh, Tyler's
Station have been recently installed. I don't
remember what it was called. Uh... That's been
very recent. Before then, it was, what, just, you
just came to a turn and stopped? Yeah, stopped,
stopped. Stopped? Stopped. It's been traffics,
or was it traffic accidents that made you
concerned right then before the lights went off?
Mm-hmm.
Can
you recall any natural disasters such as floods or
droughts or even epidemics that have hit this area
since you've been here? No epidemics, but I can
remember two floods. I believe one in 1907, the
rise of the river, and then in 1965, I believe. Was
it a hurricane, or was it weather coming from the
north? Yeah, just heavy rainfall in the North
Texas area, around Waco, Clifton, and the areas of
the general area of the Brighton River, or the
watershed that goes into the Brighton River. Oh, I
see. It rained up north and flowed downstream to us
here and flooded us through. Of course, with heavy
rains here also, rivers, the Navasota River,
would have contributed in the fact, you know, big
rains around the head, and the rains in general,
big rains in general, over central. And you can
only remember about two little areas. That's all
that I can remember of. Yes,
sir. Okay, how about grouse?
Well, the one I believe in 57 that I mentioned a
while ago, I think that can be considered a grouse.
How long did that last? Do you remember? About a
year. It lasted a whole year. Well, not
necessarily, but not enough rainfall during that
period to break it. How did that affect the
farmers? Did they all go bankrupt? Did they sue its
crops? No. They brought out the irrigation. They
brought out the irrigation and perhaps had a
little money to, or borrowed money to take care of
it. They lost
it for about 50 years. Are there any legends or tall
tales about this area? Where I'm from, you might
hear a few tall tales about the woods. And I was just
wondering if there's any legends or tall tales
about this area. There might not. I'm sure there
are, but I don't know. Okay. Now, looking back over
the years that you've been here, have the people
changed much? Not a great figure. They were the
back
end
that was in the community. That's true. Were they
more aggressive? Framelier or anything like
that? No, I don't think so. This is always, in my
opinion, the real framer community. Both Brian
and Polly What
is it about College Station that has kept you here?
It couldn't be just a job, as you've already said.
You really like it. Yes. Well, we mentioned the
good people and the idea of ladies. And my primary
purpose when I first came to Bryan and the college
basement for me to stay was that I had two sons who I
wanted one day to graduate from A&M University. Of
course, at that time it was Texas A&M College.
That was my comfortable
reason for staying in this family for thirty years
without me. Did both sons finally go to Texas A&M?
Yes, my oldest son left for four years and passed
for a device. Then he came to the University of, I
don't know, the University of and
graduated from Harvard in 1967. Oh my goodness,
you know all of them. Yeah, and my young son, Gene,
attended Allen Academy, too. Then, one year at
A&M, and then classed for the Pan American
University Baseball College. Mm-hmm, I see.
What
is it that's
keeping you here now today? Did you put your roots
here for thirty years and they're not often ready?
That's true. It's the same thing. It's the
community in mind. And the people that
I know and my good friends and... Still in
law enforcement,
so to speak, it's the plus 100% cooperation that we
get, or this department gets, from the Department
of Public Safety, the Goddard Station PD, the
Brown PD, and the Brown Sheriff Department. But as
a matter of fact, all law enforcement agencies,
all over,
Is that usually the general consensus of people
that you've met passing through, that they've
been surprised and happy about College
Station being such a nice place? Yes. Okay. Chief
Luther, I'd like to thank you very much for giving
me this time to interview you. I've enjoyed it and
learned a great deal. Thank you, sir. I've enjoyed
it very much. Appreciate you coming by. Yes, sir. I
hope I've done a halfway decent job.